“Facebook could be very different in 10 years, but I see it being around, because it's not afraid to change often,” he says, offering as example the company's purchase of photo-sharing site Instagram for $1 billion last April. 

“There are interesting parallels in Google buying YouTube and Facebook buying Instagram.  I was at each company when that happened, and both were criticized for overpaying,” he says.  “Both turned out to be good deals.  It is hugely important in moving forward to show a willingness to be bold.” 

WHAT LIES AHEAD? 

As for the future, there was some buzz recently about a Princeton University study that said Facebook was akin to a viral outbreak that would mercifully abate, losing 80% of its peak user base in the next few years. 

Facebook's cheeky response was to offer a “report” by its data scientists predicting that “Princeton will have only half its current enrollment by 2018, and by 2021 it will have no students at all.” 

Jibes and parries aside, Facebook's next decade is likely to be more tumultuous than its culturally dominant first 10 years.  A recent YPulse survey revealed that 65% of those under 18 thought Facebook was “losing its cool factor.” 

But regardless of this cultural patriarch’s future, the best way to judge Facebook’s impact is the same way we ultimately assess the job of any parent – by their kids, which in social media terms include Twitter, SnapChat, WhatsApp and international successes such as Japan’s Line and China’s WeChat. 

Facebook taught us that the Internet could be used to share our lives in a way and with a scope that was novel, and just as the dominant communication tool of the moment was growing ponderous. 

“Remember when America Online started, and you’d hear that ping and the voice said ‘You’ve got mail,’? Well that soon had turned into, ‘Argh, I've got mail,’ ” says author Boyd with a laugh.  “Then Facebook came along, and all of a sudden, ‘Oooo, there are all my friends!’ 

“There may be a lot of shiny new (social media) apps out there now, but Facebook’s impact was as extraordinarily important as AOL's.  AOL opened up people to the Internet.  Facebook opened up people to each other.” 

Contributing: Jon Swartz 
